

THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA—A SKETCH OF ITS HISTORY. 

By Henry A. M. Smith. 

About twenty-six miles from the city of Charleston ; on 
the north bank of the Ashley River, and about six miles in 
a southwestwardly direction from the railroad depot in the 
present town of Summerville can be seen an old church 
tower with an overgrown disused graveyard around it, and 
some two hundred paces farther on — on the edge of the 
river — are the walls of an old fort, constructed of that mix- 
ture of shells in lime mortar formerly called "tapia" or 
"tabby".^ These two conspicuous objects, with some 
scattered and shapeless masses of brick at irregular intervals, 
marking the sites of former houses, are all that remains of 
the town of Dorchester, once a comparatively flourishing 
hamlet in the Low-Country of South Carolina, but which 
with the lesser hamlets of Jamestown, New London or 
Willtown, Jacksonborough, Purrysburgh and Soraerton,and 
the still lesser, or only projected, villages of Radnor, Ashley 
Ferry, Childsbury and Chatham, has so long been deserted 
that its story has been nearly forgotten, and its very site 
nearly obliterated. 

In the case of Dorchester its frequent mention in histories 
of the Revolution of 1775-1783 in South Carolina; the fact 
that it gave its name to one of , the ecclesiastical and political 
divisions of the Province and State, viz : the parish of St. 
George, Dorchester, joined to its vicinity to the town of 
Summerville have conspired to preserve its name, the tra- 
dition of its former existence, and the place of its location, 
but beyond this practically nothing else is generally known 
concerning its history. It has cost no little time and labour 
to dig out of vanishing records the following account of its 
origin and fate. 

^ Often spelled "tapis" in early records. — Editor. 



THE TOWN OF DOKCIIESTER, IN SOUTH CAUOLINA. 03 

The site of the old village of Dorchester is on a neck or 
peninsula of land between the Ashley Kiver and a creek now 
called Dorchester Creek. This creek was originally known 
as Boshoe, or Bossua Creek. It is called now Rose Creek, 
where it crosses the road from Summerville to Dorchester; 
Newington Creek, or Swamp, a little higher up, where it 
crosses the road from Summerville to Bacon's Bridge and 
curves through the old Axtell, or Blake, plantation styled 
JSTewington (the northern part of which is now Dr. C. U. 
Shepard's tea farm), and finally is known as the Saw Mill 
Branch where it forms the southeastern boundary of the 
town of Summerville. 

A little below the point where Dorchester Creek de- 
bouches into Ashley River, another creek called Eagle's 
Creek also empties into the Ashley — this last creek deriving 
its name from one Richard Eagle, who, about 1734, pos- 
sessed the tract of land where the public road crossed the 
creek. 

The region about the mouths of these two creeks — es- 
pecially about the peninsula between Dorchester Creek^and 
Ashley River — was known by the Indian name oi 
Boo-shoo-ee. 

It was first granted to John Smith, who on 20th ISTovera- 
ber, 1676, obtained a grant for 1,800 acres covering this 
peninsula and the site of the future village.^ He was a man 
of considerable estate who had arrived in Carolina in 1675 
with his wife and family and especially recommended by the 
Earl of Shaftesbury "as my particular friend'^* with directions 
tliat he be allowed to take up a manor in some suitable place. 
John Smith was subsequently a member of the Grand Coun- 
cil and was created a Cassique, and died in 1682. From the 
name of the locality in which his grant was situated he was 
styled "John Smith, of Boo-shoo".^ 

The meaning of this Indian term is unknown save that 

iSec'y State's office, Vol. 38 (Prop, grants), p. 4. 
2Sec'y State's office. Grant Bk. 1696-1703, p. 92. Collections S. C. 
Hist. Soc, Vol. v., p. 470. 



iU so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GEITEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

the termination ''ee" or "e" seems to have some connection 
with water — viz: Peedee, Santee, Wateree, Congaree, Co- 
pah-ee, etc., etc. 

The creek near the village of Mt. Pleasant, now called 
Shem, w^as originally Shem-ee Creek.^ 

The land included in the grant in 1678 to Arthur Mid- 
dleton of 1,780 acres on Goose Creek (on a part of which 
the present Otranto club-house stands) is called " Yeshoe",* 
and in the grant to James Moore ot 2,400 acres on Foster's 
Creek in 1683, the lands are described as known by the 
Indian names of Boo-chaw-ee and Wapensaw.^ The Indian 
name of Foster's Creek was Appee-bee.^ 

The appellation Boo-shoo-ee was not confined to the site 
of the future village on the riverside, but was applied to the 
low land in the vicinity as "Boshoe Swamp" and geiierallj^ 
to the whole tract or plantation of 1,800 acres. 

It is spelt very variously in the old deeds and plats, viz: 
Boasoo, Boshoe, Bosho, Boosho, Booshooe, Boosoo, Bossoe, 
Bossua, Boochaw-ee, etc. 

Tke high land or bluff on the river where the village was 
afterwards located was, at the time of its location and after- 
wards, an "old field" and probably the site of the first clear- 
ing and settlement of John Smith. . 

John Smith, of Boo-shoo, died prior to December, 1682, 
as in December, 1682, his widow, Mary, married Arthur 
Middleton, and on the death of the latter, about 1684, mar- 
ried Ralph Izard. ^ 

John Smith seems to have left no children, and in some 
way his grant for 1,800 acres must have lapsed to the State 
or the method of a new grant must have been adopted so as 
to confer a good title, for in the year 1696 this same 1,800 
acres is re-granted to the settlers who were to confer upon 
it the name of Dorchester. 

m. C. O., Charleston, Bk. U. 7, p. 87. 

4Sec'y State's off. Grant Bk. 1696-1703, p. 92. 

5Sec'y State's off. Vol. 38 (Prop. Grants), p. 209. 

fiSec'y State's off. Vol. 17, Miscellaneous, p. 100. 

-Sec'y State's off. Vol. "Grants, etc., 1704-1708", p. 250. 



THE TOAVi^ OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 05 

The history of the town and township (so-called) of Dor- 
cliester, in South Carolina, begins with tlie immigration 
thither of a small colony from the township of Dorchester, 
in the then Province of Massachusetts Bay. 

The earliest record notice is in the records of the First 
Church at Dorchester, in E'ew England. 

On those records it appears that on tho 20th October, 
1695, Joseph Lord, Increase Sumner and William Pratt 
were "dismissed", i. e. transferred, from that church for 
"Y« gathering of A church for y<^ South Coralina"« 

Two days later, 2nd October, 1695, w^e read : 
"ocktober y 22 being ower lecktuer day was sett apart for 
the ordering of M^ Joseph lord for to be pastuer to A 
church gathered that day for to goe to South Coralina to 
settell the gospell ther and the names of y^' men are thes 

Joshua Brooks ] ^ ^ 

AT ^1, • 1 T>-ii- y of Concord 

JS^athamel Billings J 

William Norman Coralina 

William Adams Sudbury 

Increase Sumner 

William Pratt 

George Foxe Reading 

Simon Daken Concord 

thes with M'. Joseph lord did enter into a most solem 

Covenant to sett up the ordinances of Jesus Christ ther if 

the lord caryed them safely thither accordin to gospell truth 

withe a very large profeson of ther faithe".^ 

One William ISTorman had some years before, viz: on 
22nd September, 1684, obtained the customary survey pre- 
paratory to a grant irom the Lords Proprietors of Carolina 
for 320 acres of land, which was located on the Ashley 
River, on the northeast side, about three miles above the 

^Records of the First Church at Dorchester , New England, published 
in 1891, p. 13. 
9Ibid, p. 109. 



Dorchester 



66 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

spot where the vilkge of Dorchester was afterwards laid 
out, i. €. above the old Boo-shoo settlement. 

This William I^orman was probably the one of that name 
mentioned in the above list as of Carolina. Possibly to his 
desire for neighbours of congenial spiritual and social dis- 
position was due the original suggestion of the colony. Of 
the rest of the list, Joshua Brooks, Nathaniel Billings, George 
Fox and Simon Daken do not appear, from any records we 
have, to have ever settled in Carolina — at least their names 
nowhere appear among the actual land-owners at Dorches- 
ter. 

There are two other references to the settlement in the 
records of the Dorchester Church in Massachusetts. 

"December 5''', 1695 — The church for Carolina set sail 
from Boston Dec 14'*' at night the skiff was neer run und' 
water y*" Stormy wind being so boisterous, they kept a day 
of pray on board: & safely Landed at Carolina DecemV y° 
20'^ }•' oth' vessells had a Moneths Passage this but about 14 
days. 

"Feb': 2"^ Then was y** first Sacrament of y" Lords Supper 
that ever was Celebrated in Carolina Eight persons re- 
ceived besides Such as were of y*" Church by virtue of 
Comunion of Churches, and there was Great Jo}^ among y* 
Good People of Carolina & many Thanksgivings to y" 
Lord".fo 

And again : 

"Nov. 1, 1696, Deacon Sumn^s wife & family & His Broth-" 
Samuel Sumn' with his wife & family with Peter Kellys 
wife & six children Dismissed to y" Church of Christ neer 
Newington in South Carolina (since called Dprchester)".!^ 

The first of these entries, viz: that of December 5th, 1695, 
was evidently made after its nominal date, as it mentions 
the date of sailing, the 14th, nine days after the apparent 
date of the entry. The expression as to the "other vessels" 

lOIbid, p. 145. 
iilbid, p. 148. 



THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. ()7 

must refer to vessels other tliau the one that carried the 
"Church", as we shall see presently by Elder Pratt's diary 
there was but one vessel which at that time conveyed tlie 
members of the Church. It only marks the contrast between 
the quick passage of the vessel that carried the "Church" 
and the time taken by other vessels which sailed about the 
same thne. 

The statement as to the communion celebrated on the 2d 
February, 1695/6, being the first ever celebrated in Carolina 
is entirely erroneous. There had existed in Charles Town 
for many years before that date the Church of England, 
known as St. Philip's, on the site where St. Michael's 
Church now stands; also a "Meeting" House, or a Congre- 
gational Church, upon Meeting Street, supposed upon the 
present site of the Circular Church, as well as a Huguenot, 
or French Protestant Church, on or near the site of the 
present French Protestant Church, on a lot originally 
granted to one Michael Lovinge, a carpenter, and which 
having been sold by Lovinge to Archur Middleton was by 
the latter's widow with her husband, Ralph Izard (whom 
she married after Middleton's death), sold to James Nicholls 
on the 5th May, 1687, "for the use of the commonalty of the 
French Church in Charleston".^^ 

There can be no possible doubt but that communion had 
been repeatedly celebrated in these churches according to 
their respective rituals long before the emigration from Dor- 
chester, Massachusetts. 

The entry of 1st N'ovember, 1696, is worthy of note as 
showing that the name "Newington", which was the name 
given to the plantation of Mrs. (generally styled "Danie" or 
"Lady") Rebecca Axtell, the widow of Landgrave Daniel 
Axtell, had come into general use, evidencing that she had 
for some time been settled there. 

We have \u the diary of Elder Pratt— the William Pratt 
mentioned in the Dorchester (Mass.) Church entry of 22d. 
October, 1695— an account of the voyage of the party from 

i2Sec'y State's off. ''Grants, etc., 1704-1708", p. 250. 



()S so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

Boston to Charles Town. This, as being from firsthand, is 
more authentic than the entry in the church record of Deer. 
5, 1695, made from information. 

Elder Pratt's diary, as a picture of the time, would, save 
for its length, be worthy of production here in full. It has 
been substantially all printed by the Rev. James Stacey, in 
his .History of the Midway Congregational Churchy Liberty 
County, Georgia, printed in 1899, at l^ewnan, G-eorgia. 

The original diary is now in the possession of one of El- 
der Pratt's descendants, Mr. Joshua Eddy Crane, of Bridge- 
port, Mass. 

Summarized, Elder Pratt's diary gives the account of the 
sailing of the ''Church that was gathered in order to carry 
y*" gospel ordinance to South Carolina" from Boston on 
Dec. 5, 1695, in one vessel (not two as has been erroneously 
stated). They had good weather until the 9th, when they 
encountered a gale, but from a favorable direction, and after 
its abatement made such progress as to get into Charles 
Town harbour on the 20th December. They were welcomed 
with a salute of 9 guns, "which was more than us all", and 
were very kindly entertained on shore. 

After a week in the town he "was carried by water up to 
M'. Normans — Increase Sumner and I were kindly received 
and entertained by the Lady Axtel^^ and tho' two other men 
were endeavouring to get into favour with y" lady and other 
neighbours and to obtain the land at Ashley River" yet 
the lady and others of the neighbours were more kindly dis- 
posed to them. 

The minister, Mr. Lord, and others of the "Church" who 
had remained in Charles Town were urged by "y^ Lieut: 
General Blake^*^ and many others" to settle at ]!Tew London^^ 
and had gone to Landgrave Morton's near that place. 

I'^Of Newington. 

l*Joseph Blake, Governor and Proprietor, then residing on his plan- 
tation called "Plainsfield", on Stono River, near New Cut. 
loOn Pen Pon River, generally known as Willtown. 



THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 69 

Elder Pratt and his companion also went to Landgrave 
Morton's to view the land at New Lotidon, and there Elder 
Pratt gave Mr. Lord his preference for Ashley River, and 
the latter agreed with him. 

From Landgrave Morton's they returned, stopping first 
at "Mr. Curtises" and then at "Mr. Gilbosons'' and Govr. 
Blake's. 

"We were very kindly entertained at every place where 
we came. We heard of some of those that came from New 
England that had been guilty of gross miscarriages w^ was 
a trobel to us". 

They stayed in Charles Town, and then "after this M"". 
Lord and some of y^ church came up to Ashley river and 
upon y« Sabeth after being y*" 26"' of January M"^ Lord 
precht at M"". Normans house upon that text in 8 Pom. 1 
vrs. There were many that came to hear of y*" neighbours 
round about and gave diligent attention. The second day 
of February being Sabath day M'. Lord precht at Ashley 
river upon y* text 1 Pet: 8: 18. Most of y'' neighbours came 
to hear all y' next neighbours and several persons came 
about 10 miles to hear. The Sacrament of y^ Lords Supper 
was administered y' day and 2 deacons chosen. At this 
time there was great joy among the good people". 

Elder Pratt in this contemporaneous entry does not claim 
the communion administered on the 2d. February, 1696, as 
the first celebration of the Lord's Supper ever had in Caro- 
lina. 

The first assertion of this appears in the entry made in 
the records of the church at Dorchester, Massachusetts, as 
of 2nd February, 1696, evidently made by the person who 
kept the records from communications from Carolina. 
Thence it seems to have crept into a farewell sermon 
preached by the Pev. Mr. Danforth when a year later Elder 
Pratt (having in the meanwhile returned to New England) 
a^ain embarked for Carolina. This sermon seems to have 
been printed in 1697, and is cited in Holmes's American 



70 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

Annals for the statement (under A. D. 1696) ''the regular 
administration of the ordinances of the Gospel had not been 
introduced into Carolina until this year", and "there being 
withall in all that country neither ordained minister nor any 
church in full Gospel order", as stated by the Rev. Mr. 
Gildersleeve in his century sermon preached at Midway, in 
(ireorgia, in 1797, upon the authority of Mr. Danforth's ser- 
mon. 

The statement is repeated in the Rev. Mr. Howe's History 
of the Presbyterian Church in South Carolina, but with the 
qualification that its correctness is contested. 

Elder Pratt left Charles Town to return to ISTew England 
on 8th February, 1696. A year later he sailed from Boston 
with his family to return to Carolina. He sailed from Bos- 
ton on the 8th January, 1696-7, and left Nantasket on the 
15th. The}' enountered a very stormy passage, and only 
reached land on the 23rd of February. He does not state 
if any others of the "Church" than his own family came 
with him, but as the records of the Massachusetts church 
show that two months previous, viz: November 1, 1696, 
Deacon Sumner's wife and family, and his brother, Samuel 
Sumner, with his wife and family, with Peter O'Kelly's 
wife and six children, had been dismissed to the church 
near Newington, since called Dorchester, in all probability 
they accompanied Elder Pratt on this second voyage, and 
with the latter and his family, consisting of his wife, Eliza- 
beth Baker Pratt, and daughter. Thankful Pratt, constituted 
the departing friends to whom the Rev. Mr. Danforth ad- 
dressed his valedictory sermon printed in 1697. The con- 
fusion made of these two departures is also evidently the 
origin of the statement in Mr. Howe's history that they 
sailed on the 14th December, 1695, in two small vessels, 
whereas Elder Pratt, in his contemporaneous diary mentions 
but one. 

During Elder Pratt's absence in New England the land 
had been finally secured. On 7th July, 1696, a grant was 
made to John Stevens of the very 1,800 acres, known as 



THE TOWN or DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 71 

Boo-shoo, formerly granted to John Smitli.i^ Another tract 
of 2,250 acres lay to the west of the Boo-shoo tract on the 
Ashley Bivor, filling the intervening space between the line 
of the grant to John Smith and the 320 acre grant to Wm. 
I:Torman and the ll^ewington grant of Lady Axtell. This 
had apparently been granted or transferred to, and was in 
the possession of a Mr. Bose, and was known as "Bose's" 
or "Bose's land". Exactly how this was obtained from Bose 
or why new grants were made the record does not disclose, 
but on the 1st February, 1699-1700, two new grants were 
issued to John Stevens, one for the 1,800 acres, or Boo-shoo 
tract, and the other for the 2,250, or "Bose's" tract— 4,050 
acres in allir. 

These grants altho' issued to John Stevens, individually, 
were for the beneiit of the intending settlers of the ''Church", 
as the deeds made by John Stevens to them soon show. 

Elder Pratt and the rest of the "Church" having arrived 
in February, 1697; the Land procured was divided. Elder 
Pratt states in his diary: 

"The 23'^ of March in the year 1697 the church and 
others that were concerned did draw loots the 24^^ day that 
all meet together to stake out and mark their loots in the 
trading town on both days when they met together on 
those occasions there was love and amity and peace in what 
was acted" 

The division w^as then made and determined by lot. The 
place styled by the Elder "the trading town" was what was 
afterwards known as the village of Dorchester, which on the 
old map is stated to have been laid out as a place of trade. 
A map and division was made of the whole 4,050 acres, and 
the term Dorchester, or Township of Dorchester, was ap- 
plied to the whole, the village site being only the place of 
trade in Dorchester. The old name Booshoo, however, long 
survived. In the deeds from John Stevens the tract of 
4,050 acres is always described as consisting of two tracts, 



leSec'y State's off. Vol. 38 (Prop. Grants), p. 298, 
xnbid, p. 370. 



72 so. CA. HISTORICAL AXD GENEALOGICAL MAGAZIN^E. 

one called Booshoo and the other Rose's. The "Rose 
land" having been obtained after the Boo-shoo tract is some- 
times called the "IsTew Grant" or "I^ew Granted". 

In a conveyance from the Rev. Mr. Lord to John Hawks, 
4th March, 1716-17, of 100 acres it is described as lying 
"partly in that part of the land belonging to Dorchester 
which is commonly called the 'New Grant partly in that 
formerly called Bossoo." 

As time went on and the village grew in size and import- 
ance the name Dorchester was restricted, but universally 
applied, to this town and the older designations were for- 
gotten. 

The map showing the division of the whole 4,050 acres 
has long since disappeared. Only by a comparison of deeds 
and adjoining titles can the lines and divisions be approxi- 
mately arrived at. 

Elder Pratt's diary shows that the "Church" were not the 
sole occupiers of these divisions, for his entry says that the 
Church '^and others that were concerned^^ drew lots for the 
shares. 

There appears to have been a division into twenty-six 
parts, for John Stevens, in his conveyance of the land to be 
used for the support of the church ministry, after conveying 
certain speciiic lots, conveys l-26th of all undivided land in 
Dorchester. This undivided land consisted of 123 acres 
reserved for mill land near the mouth of the creek on its 
north side, and a "commons" of 50 acres adjacent to the 
place of trade. When the mill land was afterwards sub- 
divided it was into 26 lots of 4| acres each, and the "com- 
mons" into lots of about 2 acres each. 

The old deeds show the general division of the 4,050 acres 
to have been as follows : 

There was first set aside about 50 acres, sub-divided into 
115 lots of about a quarter of an acre each in size to form a 
"place of trade". 

Space was left for a public square and for streets, and an 
area of about 20 acres between the town and the creek 
where it enters the river was also left for public use. 



THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN" SOUTH CAROLINA. 78 

A "commoDs" of about 50 to 52 acres was set oft' adjacent 
to the town, immediatelj^ to the west. An area of 123 acres 
was set aside for mill purposes and called "mill land". This 
123 acres lay north of the town, along Boshoe Creek, and 
included the low land on each side of the creek. 

The remainder of the land was laid oft' in two divisions. 
The first division consisted of two ranches. The first rans^e 
consisted of 26 lots of 50 acres each laid oft' along the Ash- 
\ey Kiver, each lot being about 10 chains wide in its front- 
age on the river, and running back 50 chains. The number- 
ing began at lot No. 1, next to William IN'orman's line, 
about a third of a mile west of the present Bacon's Bridge, 
and were numbered successively down toward the town. 
Lot 1^0. 26 being next to the "com?iions". 

The second range of the first division lay immediately 
north of the first range, from which it was separated by an 
highway, and was divided into 26 lots of 45 acres each. 
The second division lay immediately north of the second 
range from which it was also separated by an highway, and 
was likewise divided into 26 lots of 45 acres each. 

The present village of Stallsville and the eastern part of 
the town of Summerville, viz: from about Fourth South 
Street on the north and Sumter Avenue on the west are on 
part of this second division of the 4,050 acres — on part of 
the 2,250 acres known as Rose's or the New^ Grant. 

The list of the settlers has not come down to us. The 
occupiers of the lots were not confined to them, but from 
data derived from later transfers, wills and conveyances the 
following appear to have formed substantially all of the new 
settlers who received lots in the division : 

1. John Stevens. He was in Carolina before the others 
arrived. The record does not show where he came from. 
lie was one of the leading men in the Dorchester settlement, 
and was the ancestor of the Stevens family, members of 
which have always occupied position in lower South Caro- 
lina. 



74 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

2. Revel. Joseph Lord. Was the Pastor under whom the 
"Church" immigrated. Received lot I^o. 10 in the first 
range, and purchased lots 11 and 12 in the same range. 
Lot 10 he subsequently conveyed (15 Aug. 1721) to "Michael 
Bacon Nathaniel Sumner and Thomas Osgood J'- and the 
rest of the inhabitants of in and about Dorchester now under 
the ministrv of the Rev M' Huo-h Fisher". He left Caro- 
lina and returned to Massachusetts in 1720. 

3. Increase Sumner received a lot in the first range. 

4. William Fratt. He received lot No. 23 in the first 
range. It is to his diary that we are indebted for so much 
information as to the first settlement. He returned to New 
England and there died 13th January, 1713. 

5. William Adams. 

6. William Norman. He had already a grant for 320 
acres, and does not seem to have taken any part of the 
division of the 4,050 acres. He apparently left a number of 
descendants. 

7. Samuel Sumner, brother of Increase Sumner, received 
lot 24 in the first range. 

8. 3Iichael Bacon. Received a lot in the first rano^e, and 
purchased lots 6 and 7 in the same range from John Stevens. 
On one of these last two was situated the bridge over the 
Ashley Ixiver, originally called Stevens's Bridge, but ever 
since and now known as Bacon's Bridge. 

9. John Simmons received lot 12 in the first range. 

10. Abraham Gorton received lot 13 in the first range. 

11. Jona3Mn Clarke received lot 14 in the first range. 

12. Thomas Osgood had a lot in the first range and 
l-26th part of all undivided lands. 

13. Job Chamberlain removed to Carolina in 1698, and 
in 1702 owned a lot in. the second division. 



14. 


Aaron Wat/, Sea''. 


15. 


Aaron Way, Jm^. 


16. 


William Way. 


17. 


Moses Way. 


18. 


Samuel Way. 



THE TOWX OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 75 

All ot the Ways seem to have been original settlers and 
at an early date owned lots in one or other of the divisions. 

19. Robert Miller^ an early settler, as early as 1717 had 
accumulated 479 acres in the second range of the first di- 
vision. 

The foregoing are all that can be said with any degree of 
certainty to have been among those who received lots at the 
first division of the 4,050 acres. 

The following are the additional names of others who ap- 
pear soon afterwards as owning some of the lots and as form- 
ing part of the distinctive Church: 
John Hill, in 1726. 

Thomas Satur, " 1722. 
Feter Savey, " 1738. 

Joseph JBrunson, " 1722, 
John Haioks, " 1721. 

David Batcheler, " 1707. 
John Kitchen, " 1720. 

Thomas Graves, '' 1720. 
Bobert Winn, " 1718. 

Stephen Doiose, '' 1727. 
Isaac Brunson, ''1712. 
There w^ere outsiders, apparently, who had lots very early. 
These may have been the "others that were concerned", 
mentioned by Elder Pratt. 

Ralph Izard and Daniel Chastaigner, both persons wholly 
disconnected with the "Church", held lots in the first range 
at an early date. Izard prior to 1708 and Chastaigner prior 
to 1712. 

The small lots in the town, or place of trade, very soon 
began to drift into the hands of outsiders. 

There has been a tendency to depict this settlement as 
something unusual — a band of enthusiastic missionaries 
carrying the Gospel into a primeval wilderness. 

The Rev. Mr. Howe, in his History of the Bresbyierian 
Church in South Carolina, says they "came into this country 
as a missionary church to plant an institution of the Gospel", 



70 so. CA. HrSTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

iind again they sailed "toward the land God had given them 
as an inheritance, not knowing whither they went", and 
again that they settled "here in the midst of an unbroken 
forest inhabited by beasts of prey and savage men twenty 
miles from the dwellings of any whites they took up their 
abode". 

All this is rhetorical but not historical. Mr. Howe cites 
as his authority a sermon styled "The Hand of God Recog- 
nized", preached by the Eev. Mr. George Sheldon on the 
22d. February, 1846, in the Congregational Church at Dor- 
chester, in observance of the 150th anniversary of that 
church. This sermon does make similar statements, but 
the reverend author gives no references for his statements. 

The contemporaneous records show otherwise. The 
"Church" debated between two points. Booshoo and New 
London. They were entertained and housed at both places 
by persons who had already settled. The lands they finally 
settled on had been granted away and settled by another 20 
years previously. They were surrounded by settlers who had 
preceded them, viz : Lord Shaftesbury's barony with its set- 
tlement lay to the south, on the opposite side of the river. 
West of them were the settlements of Col. Andrew Per- 
cival (granted in 1682), of William Forman (1684), of Ben- 
jamin Waring, of Lady Axtell at Newington, East, along 
the Ashley River, the entire land was taken up already by 
grants and settlements, and northeast of them, about six 
miles off towards the head of Goose Creek, was another and 
quite numerous group of settlements dating from 10 to 20 
years previous. 

Elder Pratt himself says in his diary that Mr. Lord's first 
preaching was attended by "all y"" next neighbours", and 
that persons even came from 10 miles around. 

It is not even certain that the church building, constructed 
by the Dorchester immigration, was the first church build- 
ing constructed in that section. 

The little colony of French Huguenots who settled in the 
neighbourhood of the head of Goose Creek had at a very early 



THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAUOLINA. 77 

period a small church structure on lands not far to the east 
of the present Ladson's station, on the Southern Railway. 
This last may have preceded the erection of any church at 
Dorchester. 

Provision was made at once, however, by the Dorchester 
settlers for the construction of a permanent church building 
and the support of the ministry, for on 21st September, 
1702, John Stevens conveyed "for provision for the minis- 
try of the Congregational Church now settled in Dorchester 
unto the inhabitants of Dorchester and particularly unto 
William Pratt Increase Sumner and Thomas Osgood Sen'. 
as persons intrusted by the inhabitants of Dorchester and 
to their successors from time to time chosen by the inhabi- 
tants of said Dorchester", lot l^o. 9 in the first range with- 
in the land "now called by the name of Dorchester (which 
was formerly two tracts one commonly called Boosoo the 
other Roses land)", also Lot 1 in the second division, also 
4 small lots ^tsTos. 13, 33, 44 and 112 "in the place designed 
for a place of trade within Dorchester", also l-26th of all 
undivided land within Dorchester. The ministry seems to 
have been provided for as if the "Church" itself formed one 
of the 26 to whom the tract was partitioned. 

The church building was placed on Lot 9 in the first 
range where its ruins and the old grave-yard stand to this 
day. 

It was not placed in the town or place for trade, but 
about one and one-half or two miles to the west, near the 
public road, then called the "Broad Path". 

The place seems to have thriven slowly. Thankful Pratt, 
the daughter of William Pratt, married a Daniell Axtell, of 
Sudbury, in Massachusetts. When he came to Carolina is 
not known, but he was here in 1699, carrying on a saw mill 
and tar and turpentine business in connection with Lady 
Axtell and Robert Fenwicke, and Gershom Hawdcs. He 
kept a sort of day book of accounts, which is now in the 
hands of his descendants, Mr. Joshua Eddy Crane, of 
Bridgeport, Massachusetts. 



78 so. CA. HISTORICAL AKD GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

This day book as coutainiiig the names of the persons 
with whom he dealt gives us the names ot the then persons 
living in and around Dorchester. Gershom Hawks and 
Kobert Fenwicke had each obtained grants for 1,000 acres 
in the vicinity — Robert Fenwicke in 1700^^ and Gershom 
Hawks in 1705.^^ All of the present town of Summerville, 
not included in the Dorchester tract of 4,050 acres, lies 
Avithin the last two grants. Germantown. and that part of 
Summerville adjacent to Germantown are on the grant to 
Hawks, and all of New Summerville, i. e: that part laid out 
by the Railroad Company is on the grant to Fenwdcke. 

The old mill dam and mill site which gave the name of 
"Saw Mill" Branch to the swamp is either on part of the 
oriiijinal Dorchester o^rant or the o-rant to Fenwicke. 

Daniel Axtell left Carolina in 1707 and returned to Mas- 
sachusetts, and died in 1736 at Deighton on the Taunton 
River. 

Although of the same name name as the Carolina Axtells 
there is no known blood connection between them. 

As early as 1729 the land where the old mill dam ran 
across the swamp in Summerville was known as "Saw mill 
land". It had no connection with the tract of 123 acres re- 
served as "Mill land" near the town of Dorchester, but was 
the land around the saw mill which w^as operated by Daniel 
Axtell prior to 1707. Ever since that. date this part of Boo- 
shoo Creek, adjacent to Summerville, has been known as 
"Saw Mill Branch". 

In 1882, before the present canal down the swamp was 
excavated, the old mill dam was practically intact. Some 
of the old mill timbers of solid cypress remained on the old 
mill site. The oldest inhabitant could remember no one 
who had seen the mill run, and the grow^th of pines showed 
that no water could have been kept on the pond for near a 
century. 

isSec'y State's office, Vol. 38, p. 400. 
laibid, p. 523. 



THE TOWK OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 79 

The data as to the town of Dorchester and its early his- 
tory are very scanty. The country around it began to fill 
up, and the town, lying at the head of navigation on the 
Ashley River, became a trading place and point of distribu- 
tion. It stood at a point capable of easy defence and of easy 
communication by water with Charles Town, and thus be- 
came a point of support and refuge from Indian invasions. 

The settlers in Dorchester began to overflow. It was easy 
to obtain grants of land, and many grants were obtained 
higher up and across the Ashley River, especially in the 
section known afterwards as "Beech Hill". 

Merchants established themselves in the town. The 
streets are not named on the plan, and the only names that 
have come down thro' the deeds are the ''Bay", lying along 
the river, and "George" Street, the stieet running to the 
"Broad Path" or public road. 

Gillson Clapp was a merchant "on the Bay" in 1724, and 
in 1722 Thomas Satur, of Dorchester, Jacob Satur, of Lon- 
don, Eleazer Allen, of Charles Town, and "William Rhett, 
Jr., of Charles Town, formed a co-partnership to carry on 
trade at Dorchester. 

In 1708 Dorchester was a small town containing about 
360 souls. 

Ih 1706 the Rev. Joseph Lord wrote to a friend in Massa- 
chusetts that the country was more frequented by way of 
trade. 

In 1706 the Act for the establishment of the Church of 
England in the Province was passed. Six parishes were 
created, and Dorchester was included in St. Andrew's Parish. 

In 1715 the Yemassee Indian War broke out, and the en- 
tire province south of the Stono River was devastated. 
The Yemassee invasion itself seems never to have reached 
Dorchester, but an invasion of the Indians to the northw^ard, 
which took place at the same time, was more threatening. 
This invasion was met by Capt. George Chicken at the head 
of the Goose Creek militia, and a decisive defeat w^as in- 
flicted upon the Indians at a place styled in the old accounts 
"The Ponds", 



80 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE, 

This appears to be the Percival plantation at the point 
now called "Sbulz's Lake". 

The Yemassee War inflicted a terrible loss on the Province, 
and tor many years delayed the settlement of the Province 
to the south of Ashley River. 

In 1719 St. Andrew's Parish was divided, and the upper 
portion, including Dorchester and the surrounding territory, 
was created a separate parish and called St. George. 

A church was directed to be built at a point to be selected 
by a majority of the commissioners named with the ap- 
proval of a majority of the inhabitants of the parish of the 
profession of the Church of England who should contribute 
to the building. The commissioners were: Alexander 
Skene, Capt. Walter Izard, Thomas Diston, Samuel Wragg, 
John Cantey, Thomas Waring and Jacob Satur. 

The place selected for the church was the place for a place 
of trade or Dorchester town. 

The parish church, with its surrounding graveyard, was 
then placed in the town on lots Nos. 52, 53, 54, 55 and 56. 

The parish then contained 115 English families, amount- 
ing to about 500 persons, and 1,300 slaves. The town now 
began to forge ahead. Roads were extended by statute into 
the surrounding country, and in 1722 the bridges over the 
Ashley — Stevens's Bridge (now Bacon's Bridge) and 
AVaring's Bridge (now Slann's Bridge) were confirmed as 
laiblic bridges. 

In 1723 an Act was passed for settling a fair and markets 
in the town of Dorchester, in Berkeley County, ''being a 
frontier in that part of the Country". 

In 1734 an Act was passed for the founding and erecting 
a free school at the town of Dorchester, in the parish of St. 
George, and in the same year an Act was passed to clear 
out the Ashley River up to Slann's Bridge. 

A bridge across the river, opposite the town of Dorchester, 
had already been built. 

A great loss of population in the surrounding country 
took place in 1752-56. The descendants of the original set- 



THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. SI 

tiers who gave the name to Dorchester — the members of the 
"White Meeting" or Congregationalist Church — liad over- 
flowed into the surrounding country. So many of them had 
settled in the Beech Hill section that about 1737 another 
place of worship was constructed there for tlieir convenience. 
The "Church" had acquired 95 acres in two tracts on the 
''Beech Hill" road, and on one of these tracts, not far from 
the parish line of St. Paul's, the building for worship was 
constructed. The congregation being practically the same 
as that at Dorchester, one minister served at both places on 
alternate Sundays. 

In 1752-56 a general exodus of these congregations took 
place to G-eorgia. The reasons, as stated in their records, 
were lack of sufficient lands for their increasing numbers, 
and the unhealthiness of Dorchester and Beech Hill. In 
1752 they procured two grants of land, aggregating 31,950 
acres on the coast of Georgia, between the Medway and 
l^ewport rivers, in what subsequently became Liberty 
County. E^early all of the congregations of the Dorchester 
and Beech Hill churches with their minister, the Rev. John 
Osgood, removed. The names of the settlers who took up 
the 31,950 acres and their subsequent history is fully detailed 
by the Bev. Mr. Stacey, in his History of Midway Churchy 
to which reference has already been made. 

The effect of their removal was practically the death blow 
to the Congregational Church in St. George's Parish, Dor- 
chester. 'Eo settled minister was had to perform services. 
The building at Beech Hill, being of wood, soon perished. 
From, that date the history of Dorchester ceases to be the 
history of a Congregational settlement and becomes the his- 
tory of the village of Dorchester and the parish of St. 
George, Dorchester. 

In addition to its growth as a town during these years 
Dorchester also had become the place of resort for supplies 
for the country around, which had been taken up more 
or less for the seats and plantations of a number of wealthy 
families. 



82 so. CA. HISTORICAL AKD GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

Just below on the Ashley, on its north bank, was the 
plantation of the Wrights now called "Oak Forest", and 
below that the residence of one of the branches of the Izard 
family called "Cedar Grove", well known for the style of 
its buildings and its gardens. Above and beyond the road 
to Bacon's Bridge was the seat of another one of the Izards, 
on the old grant to William Norman, and called "Burton"? 
and afterwards "Fair Spring", where are still to be seen 
the remains of a large brick house. Above this was the 
site of the original grant to Benjamin Waring, the ancestor of 
the Waring family, and which during the Revolutionary War 
was owned by Dr. David Oliphant, a member of the Council 
of Safety and Surgeon-General of the Continental forces in 
South Carolina. Aoove this again was the old grant and 
residence of Col. Andrew Percival, always known as "The 
Ponds" — the chief pond now being "Shulz's Lake". The 
most pretentious buildings and mansion were those at "New- 
ington", the old Axtell settlement, which through Lady 
Axtell's daughter, Lady Elizabeth Blake (Lady as the wife 
of a Landgrave and Lord Proprietor), liad descended to 
Col. Joseph Blake. The INewington house was said to have 
been one of the largest brick houses built in lower Carolina 
at that period, and with its double avenue of live oaks and 
wide gardens was at the time of the Revolutionary War one 
of the "show places", so to say, of the country side. The 
Ralph Izard who settled at "Burton", afterwards "Fair 
Spring", about a mile and a half distant, had married a 
daughter of Col. Blake, and a straight road or avenue led 
from one house to the other. 

West of INewington, across the swamp and within a few 
yards of the present public road, now called the Orangeburg 
road, was the brick mansion of "Mount Boone", de- 
vised by Lady Axtell to another daughter, Mrs. Joseph 
Boone. By his will in 1733, Mr. Boone directed himself to 
be buried at Mount Boone, and his broken grave stone is 
still there, adjacent to the foundations of the house, with 
the inscription placed over him in 1733. 



THE TOWK OF DOllClIESTElt, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 83 

A number of other settlements stretched up alon.i^ the 
Cypress Swamp to the north, where a number of grants had 
been made to the Ways, Warings, Postells, Ford, Vcrditty, 
Boisseau and Porcher to the point well known on the old 
plats and in the old Statutes as "Izard's Cowpen", another 
large estate of the Izard family where the public road 
crosses the Cypress Swamp. 

To the east of Dorchester was the settlement and mansion 
of Robert Miller, on what afterwards was known as "Rose 
Hill", and that of Mr. John Branford at the point where 
stands the house formerly owned by the late Dr. Brailsford. 
South of which was the place belonguig early in the last 
century to Sir Hovenden Walker, and generally called his 
barony. West of this again, and nearer Dorchester, was 
the seat of Richard Walter, which was after the Revolution- 
ary War acquired by Capt. Matthias Hutchinson, and by 
him named '-Traveller's Rest", and opposite this, on the east 
of the public road, was the seat of Mr. Richard Waring, 
originally called "White Hall", but afterwards "Tranquil 
Hill", and noteworthy for its choice site and elaborate gar- 
den. 

At the outbreak of the Revolutionary War Dorchester, 
altho' still a mere village, was next to Charles Town and 
George Town, the largest village in South Carolina. 

The Council of Safety, in July, 1775, directed its survey 
and fortification, and in October, 1775, part of the public 
store of powder and ordinance with the public records were 
lodged there for safety. In November, 1775, the fortifica- 
tions being completed, Capt. Francis Marion was ordered to 
garrison it with two companies. In May, 1778, Gen. Moul- 
trie formed his camp at Dorchester, and a year later, in May, 
1779, Gen. Moultrie, then hastening to Charles Town to 
meet the invasion of the British under Provost halted and 
reformed his army at Dorchester. 

In February, 1780, Sir Henry Clinton landed and ad- 
vanced to the siege of Charles Town, and as part of the 
general defence Gen. Moultrie constructed a redoubt on the 



84 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

high hind on the east side of the Ashley Elver, at Bacon's 
Bridge, so as to command the hridge and prevent a cross- 
ing there on Dorchester. The remains of this redoubt are 
still visible. 

All the American forces being withdrawn to the city, 
Tarleton, conimanding the British Cavalry, marched, practi- 
cally unopposed, up the Ashley, crossed the river at Bacon's 
Bridge, and took possession of Dorchester on the 13th 
April, 1780. 

Lieut. Allaire, of Ferguson's Loyal Americans, describes 
the town then as a small village, containing about 40 houses 
and a church. 

With the ca[;)ture of Charles Towmi and the subjection of 
the Low-Country to the British, Dorchester became a British 
post occupied by a British gat-rison. To the period of the 
British occupation is assigned the construction of the earth- 
work that is situate about a third of a mile northeast of 
Dorche>ter, at the junction of the public road leading to 
Charles Town and the road leading to Goose Creek (now 
commonly called the Ladson Boad), between Eagle and 
Dorchester creeks. This earth-work commands both roads 
at this junction. 

The writer has never been able to find any record of its 
construction, and it is only by tradition asc^ribed to the 
British. It resembles other redoubts constructed by the 
British at the time, especially one on the old Fair Lawn, or 
Colleton, barony at the head of Cooper River. 

On July 14, 1781, Dorchester was occupied by Col. Lee 
("Light Horse Harry") with his legion, capturing many 
horses and a good supply of ammunition, but was again 
occupied by the British when Gen. Greene concentrated his 
troops prior to the movements resulting in the battle of 
Eutaw Springs. 

On December 1, 1781, Col. Wade Hampton advanced 
against Dorchester. The B>ritish garrison of 400 infantry 
and 150 cavalry did not await his attack, but during the 
night destroyed everything, threw their cannon into the 



THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. ^b 

river and retreated to Charles Town, and Dorchester passed 
finally under the control of the American forces. 

During the occupancy of Dorchester hy the British a party 
from that o^arrison or from Charles Town visited the Fair 
Spring mansion house (near the public road, a little above 
Bacon's Bridge) for the purpose of capturing Mr. Ralph 
Izard, then an Aide-de-camp to Col. Lee, of the Legion, of 
whose presence at his home they had been apprized. He 
had scarcely time toconceal himself in a clothes-press before 
the house was entered by the British soldiers. Nothing 
saved -him but the composure and urbanity of Mrs. Izard 
(a Miss Stead) who maintained her self control, notwith- 
standing the threat to her of personal indignity and the 
plunder of her house. Affected by her behavior credence 
was given to the information that Mr. Izard was not there. 
The party being drawn off Mr. Izard crossed the Ashley in 
the rear of his house and gave the alarm to a body of the 
American troops. The enemy had again returned to the 
Fair Spring house for another search, and again retired, but 
not in time to evade the pursuit of a body of American 
cavalry, who had been pushed across Bacon's Bridge, and 
overtaking the returning enemy completely routed them. 

After the close of the Revolutionary War Dorchester 
rapidly decayed. Several reasons conduced to this. 

Its military and defensive position entirely departed with 
the growth of the middle and ui)per country and the ex- 
tension of the frontier. With the development and increase 
of roads and the accompanjdng river navigation, Dorchester 
ceased to be a point of any commercial importance, the 
points of reception and distribution of merchandise being 
shifted with the growth of the country. The country im- 
mediately around Dorchester was neither fertile or populous, 
and its population was composed of planters who could and 
did deal directly with Charles Town. Finally its location 
was an unhealthy one, and entirely unsuited for the pur- 
poses of a summer resort for the surrounding planters. 
There being no reasons based on health, business or defence 
for its perpetuation it rapidly ceased to exist. 



86 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

On March 5, 1788, scarcely five years after the close of 
the war, the following entry is made in Bishop Asbury's 
journal: 

"March 5 1788 I passed Dorchester where there are re- 
mains of what appears to have been once a considerable 
town. There are the ruins of an elegant church and the 
vestiges of several well built houses". 

With the decadence of Dorchester, and perhaps accelerat- 
ing it, came the foundation and growth of the town of Sum- 
merville, situated at first about five miles ofi:', on the head- 
waters of the same creek that flowed by Dorchester, and on 
a part of the grant originally made to Gershom Hawks in 
1705. From Hawks it passed in some way to Daniel Axtell, 
the one who ran the saw mill, for in 1729 Daniel Axtell 
and his son, Daniel Axtell, Jr., of Bristol, in Dighton County, 
Massachusetts, conveyed it to Daniel Stewart, whose son, 
Daniel Stewart, in 1766, conveyed it with some lots in the 
second division of the Dorchester 4,050 acre tract to Michael 
Geiger. From Michael Geiger it descended to his son, 
Jacob Geiger. After Jacob Geiger's death it was, in 1811, 
under proceedings in the Court of Equity for partition con- 
veyed to Jacob Williman. 

Prior to this date (1811) its occupancy had begun. The 
planters of the neighborhood, in search of some healthy re- 
treat during summer, where security could be had from the 
malarial disorders that beset their fertile but unhealthy plan- 
tations, found that the pine land ridges of Summerville an- 
swered the purpose. There was a thick growth of the long 
leaf or yellow pine, and a succession of dry sandy ridges, 
with a sufficient full in the water courses to carry off the ex- 
cessive rain and moisture. It was found to be free from the 
pest of mosquitoes, and the nights, even in summer, fresh 
and invia'oratino:. 



to* 



From about 1790, little by little one planter after another 
made a summer settlement and built a house, and the aban- 
doned and decaying houses of Dorchester (from which ma- 
terials, and especially bricks were removed) formed the basis 



THE TOWN OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 87 

and furnished the foundations of the new town, until nothing 
but crumblino^ piles of broken fragments of brick were left 
to mark the sites of the hearths of the old one. 

Jacob Williman, in his life, parted with some of the jiine 
land, and on his death the remainder was conveyed to 
Thomas Moore, by whose direction a part was laid otf as a 
town in 1832. The part laid off being what was formerly 
called "Old Summerville", lying west of a line beginning 
about the house now occupied by Mr. L. A. Emerson, at the 
corner of First South and Palmetto streets, and running in 
a southerly direction to the house now occupied by Mr. E. 
P. Guerard, on Sumter Avenue and SixthSouth Street, and 
thence easterly across Red Hill. 

About the same time as Moore had "Old Summerville" 
laid out and platted the South Carolina Canal and Railroad 
Company had "New Summerville" laid out as a town — ad- 
jacent to and east of "Old Summerville". This lay on part 
of the grant to Robert Fenwicke in 1701, which part of the 
grant, with one of the lots in the second division of the 
Dorchester tract of 4,050 acres, became the property of 
Gershom Hawks and descended to Moses Hawks by whose 
executors they were conveyed in 1737 to Daniel Stewart by 
whose son, John Stewart, they w^ere in 1760 conveyed to 
Samuel Wainwright, under whose will they passed to his 
nephew, Richard Wainwright. Under an execution against 
Richard Wainwright they were sold in 1802 to Robert Dewar, 
and, on a division of Rol»ert Dewar's property in 1831, were 
sold to the South Carolina Canal and Railroad Company. 
By that company the portion adjacent to and on each side 
of the railroad was laid out for a town, and now comprises 
the larger part of the town of Summerville. 

The town of Summerville, altho' in some respects the 
descendant of Dorchester, as being in part situate upon the 
original Dorchester grant, and in part upon land granted to 
or owned by persons affiliated with the original Dorchester 
settlers (Hawks and Stewart) and in part originally con- 
structed from materials derived from old Dorchester, yet was 



88 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GEN-EALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

settled by entirely different people. The effect of the ex- 
odus to Georgia was such that among the earlier settlers of 
Sumraerville there is not one bearing the name of any of 
the "Church" who migrated from Dorchester, Massachu- 
setts. 

THE OLD PARISH CHURCH. 

The most conspicuous object remaining on the site of the 
old village of Dorchester is the ruined tower of the old 
church. This is all that is left of the Parieh Church of St. 
George's, Dorchester. It is not as is sometimes supposed 
the Congregational Church of the old immigrants from Dor- 
chester, Massachusetts, but the church constructed when the 
Church of England was the established church of the 
Province. The Statute providing for its construction was 
enacted in 1719. This Statute appropriated £333.6s 8d 
(Carolina paper currency) to assist in defraying the cost of 
construction. 

Lots 52, 53, 54, 55 and 56 in the village of Dorchester, 
about an acre and a quarter, facing the public square, were 
purchased as a site for the church and church-yard. A glebe 
of 150 acres within the limits ot the Dorchester 4,050 acres 
was also purchased. 

The parish then contained 115 English families, number- 
ing about 500 souls, and 1,300 slaves. 

The commissioners appointed by Statute for building the 
church procured a subscription of £1,196, to which the Gen- 
eral Assembly added £466. The work of construction was 
begun in 1719, and in 1720 all the outer work was hnished. 
The church was of brick, 50 feet long by 30 wide, besides 
the chancel. In 1724 the glebe and parsonage being found 
inconveniently distant from the church, by authority given 
by a Statute, the old glebe and parsonage were sold and a 
new one purchased. The new glebe was lot 25 in the first 
range, fronting on Ashley River 50 acres, with 25 acres in 
the second range — 75 acres in all. The parsonage building 
was on the north side of the public road, about a quarter of a 



THE TOWJS" OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 89 

mile west of the church. It is now owned by Mr. John 
Grimball. Some large oaks and a few wooden buildings 
mark the site. 

In 1734 a Statute was passed reciting that the church was 
in a very decayed and ruinous condition, and also too small 
for the inhabitants of the parish, and directing the vestry 
and church wardens to repair and new pew the church and 
make an addition to it. In 1736 the repairs had advanced 
but were not yet finished. In 1739 £300 (currency) was ap- 
propriated by Parliament for a parsonage house. In 1752 
the parishioners had enlarged the parsonage, added out- 
buildings and purchased two negroes for the service of the 
rector. They had also built a handsome steeple to the 
church and had opened a subscription tor a ring of bells 
which were afterwards obtained. Two of these bells are 
stated by the author of Carolina m the Olden Time in her 
later work styled Our Forefathers to have been given to the 
church of St. Paul's, Radchffeboro, in the city of Charles- 
ton. 

During the Revolutionary War, the church is said to have 
sufiered dilapidation at the hands of the British, and at the 
close was in a nearly ruinous state. It was slightly repaired 
in 1811, and divine service was held in it again, but the re- 
vivification was transient. Its congregation had departed. 
There was neither support nor congregation for it, although 
after the Revolutionary War the few remaining members 
of the congregation had been incorporated as the Episcopal 
Church of St. George's, Dorchester. The growling settle- 
ment of Summerville established a place for worship which 
as more convenient for the summer residents who were 
members of the Church of England was attended by them, 
and in winter, when he summer population was scattered 
on the plantations, the majority attended the church of St. 
Paul's, Stono, about sixteen miles distant. In 1720 the 
church is stated by Dr. Dalcho, the historian of the Diocese, 
to be in a ruinous state, without a rector, its records all lost. 



90 so. CA. HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

Some years later it took fire from one of the many fires 
that annually devastated the woods of the Low-Country, 
and its roof and most of the woodwork was destroyed. 

The brick walls — even to their foundations — were at once 
removed by the surrounding vandals, and nothing remained 
save the tow^er. The earthquake of 1886 nearly completed 
the destruction of this, leaving but a remnant still standing. 

The ch.urch-yard was the hereditary burying place of 
many of the families of this neighborhood; the Blakes, the 
Izards and others. In 1841 one of that family of Izards 
died, and wab brought for burial in the old family lot. On 
that occasion the late Mr. Wm. Izard Bull, of Ashley Hall, 
a nephew of the deceased, caused to be thrown up around 
the ruined church and church-yard the present earth em- 
bankment, so as to clearly and forever mark and set aside 
the resting place of his ancestors. In 1857 the vestry of the 
church in Summerville, in whom by Statute the parsonage 
had been vested, sold it away. The old church and church- 
yard now belong to the Diocese of South Carolina. 

THE OLD FORT. 

The old fort that faces the old church stands on the top 
of the rise or bluff' of the river bank where it commanded 
the bridge across the river and the approach to it. It is lo- 
cated partly on lot 13 in the plan of the old village and 
partly on the street leading to the bridge head. It is the 
most perfect example remaining in the State of a fort of the 
period. It is constructed of the material called ''tapia", or 
more commonly "tabby". This is composed of oyster shells 
embedded in a bond or matrix of burnt shell lime, and 
forms a most durable and lasting composition. The exact 
date of its construction is unknown. The material of its 
construction gives no certain indication as "tabby" was used 
for such purposes from an early date in the history of the 
Province down to as late as 1812. There are the remains 
ot a fort constructed of that material on "Cole's Island" on 



■ TnE TOAVX OF DORCHESTER, IX SOUTH CAROLIN-A. 91' 

the north side of Stono Inlet, which was constructed duru)g 
the war of 1812. 

There is a tradition that the fort was coeval with the 
settlement of Dorchester, and was relied on as a defence 
against the Indian enemies of the Province. No record 
support of this exists, although it is plausible and likely. 
On the plan of the village as originally laid out m 1697, as 
afterwards, in 1742, recorded in the office of the Secretary 
of State, no fort is set down, although the site of the parish 
church, constructed in 1719, is mentioned. There are a 
number of appropriations for fortifications in the tax Acts 
passed by the Assembly from 1740 on, but in none of such 
as are published in the Statutes at Large is any specific 
mention made of the fort at Dorchester. 

In'1775 the Council of Safety of the Province directed 
Dorchester to be fortified, and in December, 1775, they di- 
rected Fort Lyttelton, near Beaufort, to be repaired with 
*'tappy". Commissioners of fortifications for Dorchester 
were appointed by the Council of Safety, and in December, 
1775, urgency was recommended to them in the erection of 
barracks, a guard room, and a place for confinement of 
prisoners; and on January 31, 1776, the Council of Safety 
authorized the payment of £760.10.07 on account of the for- 
tification of Dorchester, and in February the military stores 
were placed in the fort and magazine at Dorchester, with a 
further payment of £271.10.00 on February, 6, 1776, for 
hire of negroes on the works at Dorchester. 

"W^hatever fort or strong- work may have existed prior to 
1775 it is safe to infer that the present fort represents the 
fortification constructed in that year by order of the Council 
of Safety. 

THE OLD CONGREGATIONAL MEETING HOUSE. 

The old "White Meeting", or Congregational Church, the 
place of worship of the "Church" proper, who emigrated 
from Massachusetts to carry the Gospel into Carolina, was 
located about two miles from the village, near the public 



92 so. CA. HISTORICAL AN"D GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

road, on lot N'o. 9, in the first range. Lot No. 10, adjoining, 
was afterwards donated to the church b}^ the Kev. Mr. 
Joseph Lord, so that at that point there was 100 acres de- 
voted to the use of the church. The lirst building is said to 
have been of wood, replaced by a brick structure erected in 
1700 on the site where the ruins now stand. The only au- 
thority for this appears to be the statement to that effect 
made in the petition to the Legislature for incorporation of 
the United Independent Congregational Church of Dor- 
chester and Beech Hill in 1793. All later statements in 
sermons and histories are apparently based upon this pe- 
tition. The removal of practically the entire congregation to 
Georgia in 1752-56 caused for many years nearly an entire 
discontinuance of services in the church building or "White 
Meeting House", as it was then commonly called, and in 
which the celebrated Whitefield, in 1744, preached to a 
crowded congregation. During the Revolutionary War the 
British are said to have burnt its interior, but the walls were 
left standing. In 1794 the church was reorganized, a 
charter was procured from the State, a constitution adopted, 
and the church edifice repaired. But what a change! 'Not 
a single descendant (unless perchance thro' female lines in 
different names) of the original members of the old congre- 
gation formed one of the new. 

The church continued to be intermittently used for many 
years; having entered into affiliation with the Presbyterian 
Church in the State a supply of ministers was procured. In 
1848 Mr. George Sheldon, the then minister, delivered in 
the church that sermon in commemoration of its 150th an- 
niversary, to which reference has been made. But the same 
cause which led to the abandonment of the parish church of 
St. George's finally caused the abandonment of the old 
original "White Meeting". In 1813 Mr. Jacob Williman 
donated four acres in Surnmerville for a summer retreat for 
the minister of the church. It is on part of this four acres 
that the present Presbyterian parsonage in Summerville still 
stands. A house or parsonage was built on the four acres. 



THE TOWX OF DORCHESTER, IJST SOUTH CAROLINA. 93 

Then in 1815 the parsonage house in Dorchester was sold. 
Then most of the lots 9 and 10 around the church (all be- 
tween the public road and the river) were sold, and finally 
the attendance at the Presbyterian Church in Summerville 
superseded the use of the old building. 

In 1882 it was ruinous, bat still capable of repair. The 
earthquake of 1886 practically destroyed it, and now but a 
remnant of its walls remains. 

The ruins stand among a grove of trees with quite an ex- 
tensive country grave-yard around them. . The oldest stones 
are those to Dr. Samuel Stevens (son of the original John 
Stevens), who died in 1760, and his wife. There are no 
other stones prior to 1800. 

THE FREE SCHOOL. 

The first Act creating a free school in Dorchester was 
passed in 1724. Ten years later, in 1734, another Act was 
pa-sed. The commissioners named in the last Act were 
Alexander Skene, Thomas Waring, Joseph Blake, Arthur 
Middleton, Ealph Izard, Robert AYright, Paul Jenys, "Walter 
Izard and Benjamin Waring, Esqrs., Rev. Francis Varnod, 
William Cattell and John Williams, Esqrs. 

There is nothing to show^ the steps taken under this Act, 
but on March 19, 1756, an Act was passed for more effectually 
putting in force the provisions of the former Act of 1734. 
It recited that the commissioners under the former Act 
were all dead, and appointed the following new com- 
missioners to execute the Act, viz: The rector of the parish 
for the time being, and Henry Middleton, Walter Izard, 
Ralph Izard, Daniel Blake, John Ainslie, Esqrs., Mr. Ben- 
jamin Waring, Mr. Richard Waring and Mr. J oseph Waring. 

The minute book from this date is in existence, and shows 
that the first meeting of the commissioners, under the new^ 
Act, was held June 27, 1757. The meeting was held in the 
vestry room of the parish church in Dorchester, and the 
commissioners present were the Rev. Mr. Langhorne, 
Walter Izard, Ralph Izard, Daniel Blake, Henry Middleton, 
John Ainslie, Benjamin Waring and Joseph Waring. 



94 so. CA. HISTOEECAL AN"D GENEALOGICAL MAGAZINE. 

They elected Henry Middleton, president, and Daniel 
Blake, treasurer. Mr. Middleton was the Henry Middle- 
ton, of Middleton Place, on the Ashley Eiver, afterwards 
president of the First Continental Congress and a member 
of the Council of Safety in South Carolina. Mr. Blake was 
the owner of the Newington place, and the members of the 
commission were all prominent and influential citizens of 
the Province. 

A legacy of £500 (currency), left for the school by Mr. 
Thomas Diston, was paid to the commission, and the treas- 
urer reported that he had in his hands £2,600 (currency) to 
be put out at interest. The commissioners went to w^ork 
and. at their meeting on March 27, 1758, ordered that two 
brick houses, twenty-three feet wide and thirty-six feet long, 
one story high, with a Dutch roof, be built — one to serve 
for the school and the other as a dwelling for the master and 
his family. 

The houses were shortly completed, and the school con- 
tinued in active existence and operation in the village of 
Dorchester for many years. A large number of donations 
were made — among the most prominent were one in 1739, 
by Samuel Wragg of £100 (sterling) for the erection of a free 
school, one of £500 (currency) by Peter Taylor in 1764, and 
one of £380 (currency) by Daniel Blake in the same year — 
the two latter to be let out at interest, and the income ap- 
plied to supporting poor children who might thereafter be 
charitably educated at the free school. 

After the Revolution, in 1789, an Act was passed reciting 
that the school had received many donations from charitable 
persons, and possessed much and valuable property, and ap- 
pointed the following commissioners to continue it with the 
power of nominating successors when vacancies occurred, 
viz: William Postell, Mathias Hutchinson, Thomas Waring, 
of Pine Hill, Joseph Waring, Morton Waring, Daniel Stew- 
art, John Dawson, Richard Wainwright, Thomas Smith and 
George Evans. 



THE TOWi;r OF DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH CAROLINA. 95 

The school continued in active operation, but, as all its 
patrons and their children who formed its scholars gradually 
came from the growing village of Summerville,in 181,7 the 
commissioners procured an Act allowing them to remove 
the school from the village of Dorchester to any other part 
of St. G-eorge's Parish, and it was accordingly removed to 
Summerville, and a building constructed on land given by 
Mr. James R. Stewart, somewhere on the lot now owned by 
Mr. H. M. Manigault. There it continued for man}" years, 
and the remnant of the fund so originally arising from do- 
nations beginning under the Act of 1734 is still in the hands 
of the commissioners of the free school in Dorchester, re- 
siding in Summerv^ille, and is used and applied for school 
purposes. 

